CongestionModel
===============

Nick Walker

This was created for a contest in mathematical modelling. Here is an excerpt from the paper describing the program:

The model used to simulate traffic flow was the Nagel–Schreckenberg model for simulating freeway traffic congestion by way of cellular automation and discretizing the problem with integer positions and velocities. The model consists of four main rules, performed in order for each time iteration. The initial data is a placement of  according to a desired density, a speed limit, and a probability that represents the chance of a car slowing down due to various stimuli such as debris present on the freeway, slow drivers, drivers failing to pay attention, and so on. The randomness factor is essential to promoting the generation of traffic congestion. The procedural rules are as follows.

1.	Acceleration: Each car in the freeway segment travelling at a velocity less than the speed limit accelerates one velocity unit.

2.	Collision Avoidance: Each car checks to make sure that no other  are present within its projected path according to its velocity. If there are, the car slows down to the maximum speed necessary to avoid collision.

3.	Randomization: Each car has a random chance of slowing down one velocity unit according to the initial conditions.

4.	Advancement: Each car advances according to its velocity.

While this procedure is perfectly suited for simply observing the generation and propagation of congestion, we needed to analyze how different passing convention with multiple lanes may ease congestion. In order to do this, we opted to expand upon the model and add on to the procedure to simulate passing conventions. The multilane expansion was performed for two lanes, which simply consisted of replicating an identical data structure for the left lane as was used for the right lane in the standard model. These were then nested into the same data structure. The chosen data structure was a multidimensional array since this is a discretized problem. Only one more procedure had to be added into the model, one that allowed for passing conventions. Since using another lane to pass other  is ideally used to conserve one’s own velocity, it was deemed prudent to include a passing procedure before collision avoidance and after acceleration. To start, we modeled a passing convention with freely travelling . Essentially, as long as they would gain velocity by changing lanes, they would perform the operation. The procedure is done by first checking to see if a car must slow down if it remains in its own lane to avoid a collision. If so, it checks if the position adjacent to it in the next lane is open. If it is, then it checks to see if it could slow down traffic behind it in the other lane by switching. If it does not, it switches lanes and accelerates. If any one of those conditions is not met, the car will prefer to stay in its own lane. The desirability of switching lanes is correlated with the reduction of velocity of the car. Thus, the more the car must slow down, the more it desires to switch lanes. Whether it does, is determined by checking it’s desirability with a randomly generated number. This was done to limit the phenomena of group of  simultaneously deciding to switch lanes and also accounts for the fact that not everyone will use the passing lane to maximize their velocity in real life. The reason this model is referred to as freely travelling is because there is no distinct passing lane in this model.  will use the lane that maximizes their velocity, within a certain probability of course. The second model developed was then the contemporary convention of freeway passing. This was very similar, but had a special case when considering the left lane. As long as the right lane had enough space for a car to continue at its velocity and by switching lanes it would not impede any other , it would switch lanes. This simulates the fact that in a convention using a “slow” lane and a “passing” lane, the passing lane should only be used to navigate around congestion and the right lane should be preferred. Finally, a single lane model was included using the standard Nagel–Schreckenberg model.
